
               Apollo 15 Cold Cathode Ion Gage (CCIG) experiment measured the density of neutral
               particles to determine the amount of gas present at the lunar surface and to help
               help constrain the source and loss mechanisms of the tenuous lunar atmosphere.

  Instrument Overview
  ===================
    The Cold Cathode Ion Gage Experiment (CCIG, also referred to as the
    Cold Cathode Gage Experiment, or CCGE) was deployed as part of the
    Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package (ALSEP) on Apollos 12, 14, and
    15.  It was designed to measure the density of neutral particles to
    determine the amount of gas present at the lunar surface.  This data
    helps constrain the source and loss mechanisms of the tenuous lunar
    atmosphere.  A cold cathode ionization gage was used for this purpose.
    The gage can determine the amount of gas present, expressed as
    concentrations of particles per cubic cm or pressure in torr, but not
    its composition.  The CCIG gage head was roughly 18 x 10 x 12 cm and
    used 6.5 W.  The instrument consisted of the cold cathode ionization
    gage and associated electronics.  The mass of the experiment package
    was 5.7 kg. (Note that the term ''Gage'', not ''Gauge'', was the
    accepted use for this experiment.)
 
    The CCIG gage unit was carried in a compartment of the SIDE instrument
    and was removed and set up on the lunar surface by the deploying
    astronaut.  The gage unit was connected by a cable to the SIDE package
    and attached to the end of the SIDE ground screen holding tube, which
    was designed to pivot down to the ground and hold the CCIG in place a
    fixed distance from the SIDE, and with the proper orientation of the
    gage head.  This avoided the difficulties encountered with Apollo 12
    and 14 units, where the extreme stiffness and springiness of the
    electrical cable, plus the low lunar gravity, made it difficult to
    position the gage head.
 
    The cold cathode ionization gage is a cylindrical sensor unit in a
    stainless steel envelope consisting of stainless steel coaxial
    electrodes.  The cathode is a spool running through the center axis of
    the cylinder.  A cylindrical anode surrounds the cathode, and both
    electrodes are in an axial magnetic field of 0.09 Tesla (900 Gauss)
    produced by a permanent magnet.  A magnetic shield is mounted around
    the gage and its magnet.  A potential of +4500 volts was applied to the
    anode by a power supply consisting of a regulator, converter,
    voltage-multiplier network, and feedback network to the low voltage
    supply.  This created a self-sustained Townsend discharge in the gage
    in which electrons remained largely trapped in the magnetic field with
    enough energy to ionize any gas particles they would strike.  The ions
    would then be collected at the cathode, producing a current.  The
    cathode was connected to an auto-ranging, auto-zeroing electrometer
    that measured currents in the range 1.0E-13 to 1.0E-16 amps.  A
    temperature detector was included to enable conversion of the readings
    to equivalent pressure.
 
    Baffles are mounted in the cylinder between the opening and the
    electrodes.  A dust cover closed but did not seal the opening before
    deployment and was pulled aside by the squib motor and spring on
    command.  Because the CCIG was not evacuated, adsorbed gases produced
    an elevated response at turn-on.  The gases escaped from the gage
    rapidly at first and then slowly baked out during the lunar day.
 
    The device was sensitive to gas density rather than pressure.  The
    response varied somewhat with gas composition, but errors due to the
    uncertainties in composition were expected to be within a factor of
    two.  The data from the experiment have been expressed as equivalent
    density for a nitrogen lunar atmosphere.  The CCIG had three
    auto-switched, overlapping, sensitivity ranges enabling detection of
    the lunar atmosphere from 2.E+5 to 1.E+11 particles/cubic cm
    (equivalent nitrogen).  In the normal operational mode the basic cycle
    repeated five measurements (separated by 2.4 s), three measurements
    (separated by 40 s), and 16 seconds of calibration and auto-zeroing
    every 2.5 min.  Temperature and other engineering functions were also
    sampled within this 2.5-min cycle.  In a ground commanded special mode,
    one measurement was obtained every 2.4 s, with no other measurements
    being performed.  More details are available in ''Apollo Scientific
    Experiments Data Handbook'', JSC-09166, NASA TMX-58131, August 1974
    (revised April 1976) [NASATMX581311976].
 
    The Apollo 15 ALSEP central station was located at 26.1341 N latitude,
    3.6298 E longitude.  The CCIG was deployed approximately 17 meters
    east-northeast of the central station and about 100 meters WNW of the
    Lunar Module.  It was turned on at approximately 19:34 UT on 30 July
    1971.  The unit was operated for short periods of time during the Lunar
    Module (LM) venting for the second and third EVA, during equipment
    jettison, and during LM liftoff and was then turned off until lunar
    sunset.  The instrument was left off during lunar daytime to minimize
    the possibility of high voltage arcing at elevated temperatures.
    Operation became erratic during lunar nighttime in February 1973
    resulting in noisy data.  The automatic-zero and calibration functions
    appeared to stop operating. This problem persisted during all
    subsequent nighttime operations. On 18 July 1975 the CCIG high voltage
    was off and could not be commanded on resulting in the termination of
    the experiment. Over the course of its operations the CCIG observed
    outgassing, sunrise and sunset effects, and nighttime bursts,
    particularly a pre-dawn times, which are believed to be real argon-40
    events.
 
 
  This instrument description was provided by the NSSDC.

        