
The Energetic Particles experiment on Venera 10 was the Soviet KS-18-5M suite of particle detectors that measured charged particles (proton and electron flux) of medium energies in interplanetary space during cruise and while orbiting Venus. KS-18-5M suite comprised six sensors: an STS-5 gas-discharge (Geiger-Mueller) counter (D1), three solid state detectors (D2, D4, D5), a windowed SBT-9 gas discharge counter (D6), and a Cherenkov counter (D3). Spacecraft memory was used for data storage, time resolution was about four hours. The instrument data run from 19 August 1975 through Venus orbit insertion on 25 October 1975 and end on 1 April 1976.

The KS-18-5M suite comprised six sensors: an STS-5 gas-discharge (Geiger-Mueller) counter (D1), three solid state detectors (D2, D4, D5), a windowed SBT-9 gas discharge counter (D6), and a Cherenkov counter (D3). Spacecraft memory was used for data storage, time resolution was about four hours. The instrument operated and returned data from 9 June 1975, right after launch, until 11 January 1976, after almost three months in orbit around Venus.

Sensor D1 was an STS-5 series gas discharge counter. It was a 1 cm diameter, 9 cm long tube mounted inside the wall of the spacecraft. The wall provided minimal shielding (approximately 1 g/cm2 aluminum) for particles coming from the direction of the Sun (geometric factor 13 cm2 sr), giving a threshold of proton energy of >30 MeV and electron energy of >2 MeV. For protons coming from directions other than the Sun, the body of the spacecraft provided shielding requiring an energy threshold of 500 MeV. These particles had a geometric factor of 54 cm2 sr. The flux intensity in particles per second was measured continuously for all species.

Sensor D2 was a solid state detector (SSD) comprising a 400 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to measure the flux of protons from within 30 degrees of the anti-Sun direction with a geometric factor of 0.2 cm2 sr. It could measure protons in the energy range from 4 to 12 MeV with an angular precision of approximately 10 degrees. The sensor measured flux in particles per second continuously.

Sensor D3 was a Cherenkov detector consisting of a 30 x 30 mm plexiglass cylinder and a photomultiplier. It was designed to measure protons of energy greater than 500 MeV and electrons greater than 10 MeV from all directions with a geometric factor 30 cm2 sr. It measured flux in particles per second continuously.

Sensor D4 was an SSD comprising a 30 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to measure the flux of protons from the sunward direction with an energy range from 1 to 5 MeV. The sensor measured flux in particles per second continuously, but the data returned from this detector were not usable.

Sensor D5 was an SSD comprising a 30 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to measure the flux of protons from the anti-sunward direction with an energy range from 0.3 to 5 MeV. The sensor measured flux in particles per second continuously, but the data returned from this detector were not usable.

Sensor D6 was a windowed gas discharge detector of the SBT-9 series, designed to measure protons of energy greater than 1 MeV and electrons greater than 0.05 MeV. The data returned from this detector were not usable.

This experiment was one of several provided by the Theoretical and Applied Space Physics Division (TASPD) of the Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics of Moscow State University (MSU). The experiments flew on the Soviet Zond, Luna, Mars, Venera, Vega, and Phobos interplanetary/planetary missions and measured energetic (MeV) particles in the interplanetary medium. The earliest missions (Zond 1 and 3) measured protons above 30 MeV. Later missions measured lower energy protons and some also measured fluxes toward and away from the Sun.

The Principal Investigator for this experiment was Dr. Eugene Ya. Volodin of Moscow State University.

