
The Energetic Particles experiment on Venera 11 was the Soviet ASP-8 suite of particle detectors that measured charged particles (proton and electron flux) of medium energies in interplanetary space during cruise and at Venus flyby. The ASP-8 suite comprised three sensors: an SBM-20 gas-discharge (Geiger-Mueller) counter (D1) and two solid state detectors (D2, D3). Spacecraft memory was used for data storage, time resolution was 20 minutes. The instrument data run from 11 September 1978, two days after launch, through Venus flyby on 25 December 1978 and end on 4 October 1974.

Sensor D1 was an SBM-20 series gas discharge counter. It was mounted inside the wall of the spacecraft. The wall provided minimal shielding (approximately 1 g/cm2 aluminum) for particles coming from the direction of the Sun (geometric factor 13 cm2_sr), giving a threshold of proton energy of >30 MeV and electron energy of >2 MeV. For protons coming from directions other than the Sun, the body of the spacecraft provided shielding requiring an energy threshold of 500 MeV. These particles had a geometric factor of 54 cm2 sr. The flux intensity in particles per second was measured continuously for all species.

Sensor D2 was a Solid State Detector (SSD) consisting of a 750 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to measure the flux of protons of energies between 2.9 and 5.5 MeV from within 30 degrees of the sunward direction with a geometric factor of 0.015 cm2 sr. The main spacecraft axis was sunward directed with approximately 10 degree precision.

Sensor D3 was an identical SSD consisting of a 750 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to measure the flux of protons of energies between 2.9 and 5.5 MeV from within 30 degrees of the anti-sunward direction with a geometric factor of 0.015 cm2 sr.

This experiment was one of several provided by the Theoretical and Applied Space Physics Division (TASPD) of the Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics of Moscow State University (MSU). The experiments flew on the Soviet Zond, Luna, Mars, Venera, Vega, and Phobos interplanetary/planetary missions and measured energetic (MeV) particles in the interplanetary medium. The earliest missions (Zond 1 and 3) measured protons above 30 MeV. Later missions measured lower energy protons and some also measured fluxes toward and away from the Sun.

The Principal Investigator for this experiment was Dr. Nick N. Kontor of Moscow State University.

