
The Energetic Particles experiment on Venera 14 was the Soviet ASP-18M suite of particle detectors that measured the flux of charged particles of medium energies during cruise and Venus flyby. The ASP-18M suite consisted of five sensors: four solid state detectors (D1, D2, D4, D5) and one gas-discharge (Geiger-Mueller) detector (D3). The sensors measured the flux continuously. Stored in the spacecraft memory, the data would be transmitted at 20- or 80-minute resolution depending on the detector. The instrument data run from 6 November 1981, two days after launch, through Venus flyby on 5 March 1982, and continue until 16 March 1983.

Sensor D1 was a Solid State Detector (SSD) consisting of a 420 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to continuously measure the flux of protons and alpha particles coming from within 30 degrees of the sunward direction with a geometric factor of 0.09 cm2 sr in three channels. The main spacecraft axis was sunward directed with 10 - 15 degree precision. Channel 1 (D1.1) counted protons in the energy range from 1.9 to 2.5 MeV and alpha-particles of energy 3.9 to 4.4 MeV. Channel 2 (D1.2) counted protons from 2.5 - 4.6 MeV and alpha particles from 4.4 - 6.1 MeV. Channel 3 (D1.3) counted protons from 4.6 - 8.0 MeV and alpha particles from 6.1 - 8.8 MeV. The time resolution of the data was 80 minutes.

Sensor D2 was an SSD consisting of a 420 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to continuously measure the flux of protons and alpha particles coming from within 30 degrees of the anti-sunward direction with a geometric factor of 0.09 cm2 sr in three channels. The main spacecraft axis was sunward directed with 10 - 15 degree precision. Channel 1 (D2.1) counted protons in the energy range from 1.9 to 2.5 MeV and alpha-particles of energy 3.9 to 4.4 MeV. Channel 2 (D2.2) counted protons from 2.5 - 4.6 MeV and alpha particles from 4.4 - 6.1 MeV. Channel 3 (D2.3) counted protons from 4.6 - 8.0 MeV and alpha particles from 6.1 - 8.8 MeV. The time resolution of the data was 80 minutes.

Sensor D3 was an SBM-20 series gas discharge (Geiger-Mueller) counter, a thin 1 cm diameter, 9 cm long cylinder. It was mounted inside the wall of the spacecraft on the sunward facing side. It had minimal shielding (approximately 1 g/cm2 aluminum) provided by the spacecraft skin for particles coming from the direction of the Sun (geometric factor 13 cm2 sr), giving a threshold of proton energy of >30 MeV and electron energy of >2 MeV. For protons coming from directions other than the Sun, the body of the spacecraft provided shielding requiring an energy threshold of 500 MeV. These particles had a geometric factor of 54 cm2 sr. The flux intensity in particles per second was measured continuously for all species. Time resolution of the data was 20 minutes.

Sensor D4 was an SSD consisting of a 50 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to continuously measure the flux of protons and alpha particles coming from within 30 degrees of the sunward direction with a geometric factor of 0.09 cm2 sr. It measured protons with energy 1.5 to 3.5 MeV and alpha-particles with energy 3.7 to 65 MeV. Time resolution of the data was 20 minutes.

Sensor D5 was an SSD consisting of a 50 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to continuously measure the flux of protons and alpha particles coming from within 30 degrees of the anti-sunward direction with a geometric factor of 0.09 cm2 sr. It measured protons with energy 1.5 to 3.5 MeV and alpha-particles with energy 3.7 to 65 MeV. Time resolution of the data was 20 minutes.

This experiment was one of several provided by the Theoretical and Applied Space Physics Division (TASPD) of the Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics of Moscow State University (MSU). The experiments flew on the Soviet Zond, Luna, Mars, Venera, Vega, and Phobos interplanetary/planetary missions and measured energetic (MeV) particles in the interplanetary medium. The earliest missions (Zond 1 and 3) measured protons above 30 MeV. Later missions measured lower energy protons and some also measured fluxes toward and away from the Sun.

The Principal Investigator for this experiment was Dr. Nick N. Kontor of Moscow State University.

