
The Energetic Particles experiment on Venera 16 was the Soviet KS-18-6V suite of detectors. It was designed to monitor the flux of charged particles of medium energies during cruise and from Venus orbit. The KS-18-6V suite consisted of six sensors: two gas-discharge (Geiger-Mueller) detectors (D1, D2) and four solid state detectors (D3, D4, D5, D6). The sensors measured the flux continuously. Stored in the spacecraft memory, the data would be transmitted at 4 hour resolution. The instrument data cover the period from 8 June 1983, one day after launch, through Venus orbit insertion on 14 October 1983, and continue until 28 May 1985.

Sensor D1 was an SBM-20 series gas discharge counter, a thin 1 cm diameter, 9 cm long cylinder. It was mounted inside the wall of the spacecraft on the sunward facing side. It had minimal shielding (approximately 1 g/cm2 aluminum) provided by the spacecraft skin for particles coming from the direction of the Sun (geometric factor 13 cm2 sr), giving a threshold of proton energy of >30 MeV and electron energy of >2 MeV. For protons coming from directions other than the Sun, the body of the spacecraft provided shielding requiring an energy threshold of 500 MeV. These particles had a geometric factor of 54 cm2 sr. The flux intensity in particles per second was measured continuously for all species.

Sensor D2 was an SBM-20 series gas discharge counter, identical to D1 but with additional shielding. It was mounted inside the wall of the spacecraft on the sunward facing side. It had minimal shielding (approximately 1 g/cm2 aluminum) provided by the spacecraft skin, but also had a brass shield for particles coming from the direction of the Sun (geometric factor 13 cm2 sr), giving a higher threshold of proton energy of >60 MeV and electron energy of >2.5 MeV. For protons coming from directions other than the Sun, the body of the spacecraft provided shielding requiring an energy threshold of 500 MeV. These particles had a geometric factor of 54 cm2 sr. The flux intensity in particles per second was measured continuously for all species.

Sensor D3 was a Solid State Detector (SSD) consisting of a 70 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to continuously measure the flux of protons and alpha particles coming from within 30 degrees of the sunward direction with a geometric factor of 0.11 cm2 sr in two channels. The main spacecraft axis was sunward directed with 10 degree precision. Channel 1 (D3.1) counted protons with energy of 1.1 to 11 MeV and alpha particles of energy 3.4 to 250 MeV. Channel 2 (D3.2) measured alpha particles of energy 6.6 to 24 MeV.

Sensor D4 was an SSD consisting of a 400 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to continuously measure the flux of protons and alpha particles coming from within 30 degrees of the sunward direction with a geometric factor of 0.11 cm2 sr in two channels. The first channel (D4.1) counted protons of energy 1.2 to 65 MeV and alpha particles from 3.4 to 1000 MeV. Channel 2 (D4.2) counted protons of energy 5.2 to 8.1 MeV and alpha particles of energy 6.6 to 135 MeV.

Sensor D5 was a Solid State Detector (SSD) consisting of a 70 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to continuously measure the flux of protons and alpha particles coming from within 30 degrees of the anti-sunward direction with a geometric factor of 0.11 cm2 sr in two channels. The main spacecraft axis was sunward directed with 10 degree precision. Channel 1 (D5.1) counted protons with energy of 1.3 to 8.5 MeV and alpha particles of energy 3.5 to 190 MeV. Channel 2 (D5.2) measured alpha particles of energy 6.6 to 22 MeV.

Sensor D6 was an SSD consisting of a 400 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to continuously measure the flux of protons and alpha particles coming from within 30 degrees of the anti-sunward direction with a geometric factor of 0.11 cm2 sr in two channels. The first channel (D6.1) counted protons of energy 1.3 to 70 MeV and alpha particles from 3.5 to 1000 MeV. Channel 2 (D6.2) counted protons of energy 5.2 to 9.6 MeV and alpha particles of energy 6.6 to 170 MeV.

This experiment was one of several provided by the Theoretical and Applied Space Physics Division (TASPD) of the Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics of Moscow State University (MSU). The experiments flew on the Soviet Zond, Luna, Mars, Venera, Vega, and Phobos interplanetary/planetary missions and measured energetic (MeV) particles in the interplanetary medium. The earliest missions (Zond 1 and 3) measured protons above 30 MeV. Later missions measured lower energy protons and some also measured fluxes toward and away from the Sun.

The Principal Investigator for this experiment was Dr. Evgeni A. Chuchkov of Moscow State University.

