
The Energetic Particles experiment on Venera 2 was the Soviet KS-18M suite of particle detectors that monitored the flux of charged particles of medium energies in interplanetary space during cruise and in the vicinity of Venus, specifically measuring protons from the direction of the Sun and perpendicular to the Sun-spacecraft line. The spacecraft axis was sunward directed and the spin period was about 9.6 minutes.

The KS-18M suite consisted of two sensors: a gas discharge (Geiger-Mueller) counter (D1) and a solid-state detector (D2). The sensors measured the flux continuously, typically once every four hours a measurement would be stored onboard in the spacecraft memory, and the data sent at each communication session. The instruments operated from shortly after launch on 12 November 1965 until Venera 2 stopped transmitting data due to overheating. The last known data from this experiment were returned on 25 January 1966, 33 days before the Venus flyby.

Sensor D1 was a gas discharge counter of the STS-5 series. It was a 1 cm diameter, 9 cm long tube mounted on the inside wall of the spacecraft. The wall provided minimal shielding (approximately ~ 1 g/cm2 aluminum) for particles coming from the direction of the Sun, giving a threshold of proton energy of >30 MeV and electron energy of >2 MeV. For protons coming from directions other than the Sun, the body of the spacecraft provided shielding requiring an energy threshold of 500 MeV. The flux intensity in particles per second was measured continuously for all species.

Sensor D2 was a solid state detector (SSD) comprising a 35 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to measure the flux of protons arriving within 45 degrees of the direction perpendicular to the Sun-spacecraft line. It could measure protons in the energy range from 1 to 5 MeV. The main spacecraft axis was sunward directed with a precision of approximately 10 degrees.

This experiment was one of several provided by the Theoretical and Applied Space Physics Division (TASPD) of the Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics of Moscow State University (MSU). The experiments flew on the Soviet Zond, Luna, Mars, Venera, Vega, and Phobos interplanetary/planetary missions and measured energetic (MeV) particles in the interplanetary medium. The earliest missions (Zond 1 and 3) measured protons above 30 MeV. Later missions measured lower energy protons and some also measured fluxes toward and away from the Sun.

The Principal Investigator for this experiment was Dr. German P. Lyubimov of Moscow State University.

