
The Energetic Particles experiment on Venera 4 was the Soviet KS-2M suite of particle detectors that monitored the flux of charged particles of medium energies during cruise and Venus approach. The KS-2M suite consisted of four sensors: a gas discharge (Geiger-Mueller) counter (D1), two solid state detectors (D2, D3), and a windowed gas discharge counter (D4). The sensors measured the flux continuously, typically once every four hours a measurement would be stored onboard in the spacecraft memory, and the data would be sent at each communication session. Data were collected from launch on 12 June 1967 until Venus approach. The last known data are from 16 October 1967, two days before the probe reached Venus.

Sensor D1 was a gas discharge counter of the STS-5 series. It was a 1 cm diameter, 9 cm long tube mounted inside the wall of the spacecraft. The wall provided minimal shielding (approximately 1 g/cm2 aluminum) for particles coming from the direction of the Sun, giving energies of >30 MeV for protons and >2 MeV for electrons. Protons from other directions had a threshold of 500 MeV. All species are measured together.

Sensor D2 was a solid state detector (SSD) comprising a 35 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to measure the flux of protons arriving within 45 degrees of the direction toward the Sun. It could measure protons in the energy range from 1 to 5 MeV. The main spacecraft axis was sunward directed with a precision of approximately 10 degrees.

Sensor D3 was a solid state detector (SSD) comprising a 35 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to measure the flux of protons arriving within 45 degrees of the anti-sunward direction. It could measure protons in the energy range from 1 to 5 MeV.

Sensor D4 was a gas-discharge counter with a window of the SBT-9 series. Its square mica window was directed in the anti-sunward direction. Particles within 45 degrees of the anti-sunward direction would be counted through the window: protons of energy greater than 1 MeV and electrons of energy greater than 0.05 MeV. It would also count protons >30 MeV and electrons >2 MeV from other directions through the sensor body.

This experiment was one of several provided by the Theoretical and Applied Space Physics Division (TASPD) of the Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics of Moscow State University (MSU). The experiments flew on the Soviet Zond, Luna, Mars, Venera, Vega, and Phobos interplanetary/planetary missions and measured energetic (MeV) particles in the interplanetary medium. The earliest missions (Zond 1 and 3) measured protons above 30 MeV. Later missions measured lower energy protons and some also measured fluxes toward and away from the Sun.

The Principal Investigator for this experiment was Dr. German P. Lyubimov of Moscow State University.

