
The Energetic Particles experiment on Venera 5 was the Soviet KS-3M suite of detectors that monitored the flux of charged particles of medium energies during cruise and Venus approach. The KS-3M suite consisted of four sensors: a gas discharge (Geiger-Mueller) counter (D1), three solid state detectors (D2, D3, D4), and a windowed gas discharge counter (D5). The sensors measured the flux continuously, typically once every four hours a measurement would be stored onboard in the spacecraft memory, and the data would be transmitted at each communication session. The instrument started operation after launch on 5 January 1969. The last known data are from 9 March 1969, Venera 5 Venus encounter occurred on 16 May 1969.

Sensor D1 was a gas discharge counter of the STS-5 series. It was a 1 cm diameter, 9 cm long tube mounted inside the wall of the spacecraft. The wall provided minimal shielding (approximately ~1 g/cm2 aluminum) for particles coming from the direction of the Sun, giving energies of >30 MeV for protons and >2 MeV for electrons. Protons from other directions had a threshold of 500 MeV. All species are measured together.

Sensors D2, D3, and D4 were all solid state detectors (SSD), silicon surface barrier detectors, each comprising a 35 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. They were designed to measure the flux of protons of energy 1 - 4 MeV. All sensors had a field of view of +/- 45 degrees. One sensor (D2) pointed in the sunward direction, one (D3) pointed anti-sunward, and one (D4) pointed perpendicular to the Sun-spacecraft line. The spacecraft axis pointed toward the Sun with a precision of 10 degrees.

Sensor D5 was a gas-discharge counter with a window. The window was directed perpendicular to the sunward direction. Through the window, it counted electrons of energy greater than 0.05 MeV and protons of energy great than 1 MeV. View angle was within 45 degrees of perpendicular to the Sun-spacecraft line. Through its body it additionally counted protons of energy greater than 30 MeV and electrons of energy greater than 2 MeV from other directions.

This experiment was one of several provided by the Theoretical and Applied Space Physics Division (TASPD) of the Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics of Moscow State University (MSU). The experiments flew on the Soviet Zond, Luna, Mars, Venera, Vega, and Phobos interplanetary/planetary missions and measured energetic (MeV) particles in the interplanetary medium. The earliest missions (Zond 1 and 3) measured protons above 30 MeV. Later missions measured lower energy protons and some also measured fluxes toward and away from the Sun.

The Principal Investigator for this experiment was Dr. Nick N. Kontor of Moscow State University.

