
The Energetic Particles experiment on Venera 7 was the Soviet KS-4M suite of detectors that monitored the flux of charged particles of medium energies during cruise and Venus encounter. The KS-3M suite consisted of five sensors: a gas discharge (Geiger-Mueller) counter (D1), and four solid state detectors (D2, D3, D4, D5). The sensors measured the flux in particles per second continuously, typically once every four hours a measurement would be stored onboard in the spacecraft memory, and the data would be sent at each communication session. The instrument operated and returned data from launch on 17 August 1970 until the Venus encounter on 15 December 1970.

Detector D1 was a gas-discharge (Geiger-Mueller) counter of the STS-5 type mounted inside the spacecraft wall, which provided minimal shielding of approximately 1 g/cm2. It was designed to measure protons and electrons from the sunward direction, with a geometric factor of 13 cm2-sr. The energy threshold for protons was greater than 30 MeV, and for electrons greater than 2 MeV. It also detected protons with energies above 500 MeV from other directions, passing through the spacecraft body, with a geometric factor of 54 cm2-sr.

Detector D2 was a solid state detector (SSD) comprising a 30 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to measure protons of energies of 1 to 5 MeV coming from within 30 degrees of the sunward direction with a geometric factor of 0.19 cm2-sr. The main axis of the spacecraft is sunward directed with a precision of about 10 degrees.

Detector D3 was a solid state detector comprising a 30 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to measure protons of energies of 1 to 5 MeV coming from within 30 degrees of the antiSun direction with a geometric factor of 0.30 cm2-sr.

Detector D4 was a solid state detector comprising a 400 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to measure protons of energies of 4 to 12 MeV coming from within 30 degrees of the anti-sunward direction with a geometric factor of 0.19 cm2-sr.

Detector D5 was a solid state detector comprising a 400 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to measure protons of energies of 4 to 12 MeV coming from within 30 degrees of the sunward direction with a geometric factor of 0.30 cm2-sr.

This experiment was one of several provided by the Theoretical and Applied Space Physics Division (TASPD) of the Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics of Moscow State University (MSU). The experiments flew on the Soviet Zond, Luna, Mars, Venera, Vega, and Phobos interplanetary/planetary missions and measured energetic (MeV) particles in the interplanetary medium. The earliest missions (Zond 1 and 3) measured protons above 30 MeV. Later missions measured lower energy protons and some also measured fluxes toward and away from the Sun.

The Principal Investigator for this experiment was Dr. Nick N. Kontor of Moscow State University.

