
The Energetic Particles experiment on Venera 8 was the Soviet KS-18-4M suite of detectors that monitored the flux of charged particles (proton and electron flux) of high and medium energies in interplanetary space during cruise and in the vicinity of Venus at Venus approach. The KS-18-4M suite comprised six sensors: an STS-5 gas-discharge (Geiger-Mueller) counter (D1), three solid state detectors (D2, D3, D4), and two SBT-9 gas discharge counters (D5, D6). Spacecraft memory was used for data storage, time resolution was about four hours. The instrument operated from launch on 27 March 1972 until Venera 8 reached Venus on 22 July 1972.

Sensor D1 was an STS-5 series gas discharge counter. It was a 1 cm diameter, 9 cm long tube mounted inside the wall of the spacecraft. The wall provided minimal shielding (approximately 1 g/cm2 aluminum) for particles coming from the direction of the Sun (geometric factor 13 cm2_sr), giving a threshold of proton energy of >30 MeV and electron energy of >2 MeV. For protons coming from directions other than the Sun, the body of the spacecraft provided shielding requiring an energy threshold of 500 MeV. These particles had a geometric factor of 54 cm2 sr. The flux intensity in particles per second was measured continuously for all species.

Sensor D2 was a solid state detector (SSD) comprising a 30 micron thick plate of silicon covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer. It was designed to measure the flux of protons from within 30 degrees of the anti-Sun direction. It could measure protons in the energy range from 1 to 5 MeV with an angular precision of approximately 10 degrees and a geometric factor of 0.4 cm2 sr. The sensor measured flux in particles per second continuously.

Sensor D3 was an SSD designed to measure the flux of protons from within 30 degrees of the direction of the Sun. It had a 400 micron thick silicon plate covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer, to make measurements of protons in the 5 to 10 MeV energy range. It continuously measured flux in particles per second with an angular precision of 10 degrees and a geometric factor of 0.4 cm2 sr.

Sensor D4 is an SSD sensor designed to measure the flux of particles within 30 degrees of the anti-Sun direction. It was an approximately 30 micron thick silicon sensor covered by thin foil and placed under a collimator with a hole in the shape of a cone, and a pulse-amplitude analyzer, that allows counting of protons of energy 0.3 to 10 MeV from the anti-Sun direction with a geometric factor of 0.4 cm2 sr. It continuously measured flux in particles per second with an angular precision of 10 degrees.

Sensor D5 was a windowed gas-discharge sensor of the SBT-9 series. Its square mica window (approximately 0.2 cm2) was directed towards the Sun. Particles within 30 degrees of the sunward direction would be counted through the window with a geometric factor of 0.2 cm2 sr: protons of energy greater than 1 MeV, electrons of energy greater than 0.05 MeV, and it would count solar gamma-ray quanta of energy greater than 5 keV. It would also count protons >30 MeV and electrons >2 MeV from other directions through the sensor body with a geometric factor of 7 cm2 sr. It continuously measured flux in particles per second with an angular precision of 10 degrees. The data from this sensor was too noisy to be useful.

Sensor D6 was also a windowed gas-discharge sensor of the SBT-9 series. Its window was directed away from the Sun. Particles within 30 degrees of the anti-sunward direction would be counted through the window with a geometric factor of 0.2 cm2 sr: protons of energy greater than 1 MeV and electrons of energy greater than 0.05 MeV. It would also count solar gamma-ray quanta of energy greater than 5 keV. It would count protons >30 MeV and electrons >2 MeV from other directions through the sensor body with a geometric factor of 7 cm2 sr. It continuously measured flux in particles per second with an angular precision of 10 degrees.

This experiment was one of several provided by the Theoretical and Applied Space Physics Division (TASPD) of the Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics of Moscow State University (MSU). The experiments flew on the Soviet Zond, Luna, Mars, Venera, Vega, and Phobos interplanetary/planetary missions and measured energetic (MeV) particles in the interplanetary medium. The earliest missions (Zond 1 and 3) measured protons above 30 MeV. Later missions measured lower energy protons and some also measured fluxes toward and away from the Sun.

The Principal Investigator for this experiment was Dr. Nick N. Kontor of Moscow State University.

