
The Energetic Particles Experiment on Vega 2 was the Soviet VFS-VK suite of particle detectors that measured the flux of charged particles of medium energies during cruise and Venus flyby. The VFS-VK suite consisted of three closely placed gas-discharge counters of the SBM-20 series. The sensors measured the flux continuously. Data was recorded both from single counters (denoted D1) and from coinciding combinations of pulses (D2). Stored in the spacecraft memory, the data would be transmitted at 20-minute resolution. The Vega 2 instrument data run from 28 December 1984, seven days after launch, until 3 May 1985. Venus flyby was on 15 June 1985. The Vega 1 spacecraft carried an identical instrument.

Each SBM-20 series gas discharge (Geiger-Mueller) counter was a thin 1 cm diameter, 9 cm long cylinder. Each one measured particles coming from any direction. They were mounted closely together inside the wall of the spacecraft. They had minimal shielding (approximately 1 g/cm2 aluminum) provided by the spacecraft skin for particles coming from a cone centered 45 degrees from the direction of the Sun (geometric factor 13 cm2 sr), giving a threshold of proton energy of >30 MeV and electron energy of >2 MeV for particles coming from that direction. For protons coming from other directions, the body of the spacecraft provided shielding requiring an energy threshold of 500 MeV. These particles had a geometric factor of 54 cm2 sr. The flux intensity in particles per second was measured continuously for all species. Time resolution of the data was 20 minutes. Two types of data were returned. The first (D1) was the number of hits on any one of the three gas discharge counters. The second (D2) was coincident counts of two gas-discharge counters. The spacecraft was spinning slowly with a period of 0.2 to 1 hour, pointing accuracy to the Sun was within 10 degrees.

This experiment was one of several provided by the Theoretical and Applied Space Physics Division (TASPD) of the Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics of Moscow State University (MSU). The experiments flew on the Soviet Zond, Luna, Mars, Venera, Vega, and Phobos interplanetary/planetary missions and measured energetic (MeV) particles in the interplanetary medium. The earliest missions (Zond 1 and 3) measured protons above 30 MeV. Later missions measured lower energy protons and some also measured fluxes toward and away from the Sun.

The Principal Investigator for this experiment was Dr. Vladimir I. Tulupov of Moscow State University.

