This investigation acquired Earth-based, polarimetric radar image data of Venus using the Arecibo Observatory 12.6-cm (2380 MHz) transmitter in Puerto Rico and receivers at the Arecibo Observatory and Green Bank Telescope in West Virginia. The archive contains maps of radar backscatter from Venus assembled from individual looks collected in observing runs from 1988 to 2020. Those looks are also archived in delay-Doppler format with the PDS, and the documentation for that archive details the data collection steps (https://pds-geosciences.wustl.edu/missions/venus_radar/index.htm). In all but the 2012 dataset, the echoes were transmitted from and received at the Arecibo Observatory. In 2012 the Green Bank Telescope was used as a receiver. For each observing year with Venus close to inferior conjunction, there are multi-look views of the "northern" and "southern" hemispheres, defined with respect to the sub-radar point latitude and longitude during the period. All maps are referenced to a 335 E projection longitude. Each map set contains an image in the opposite-sense circular polarization (OCP, sometimes called "polarized") and one in the same-sense circular polarization (SCP, sometimes called "depolarized"). Spatial sampling is at 1 km per pixel, or about 106 pixels per degree on Venus. The individual looks are normalized to the background noise level such that the OCP and SCP mosaics can be ratioed to obtain the circular polarization ratio (CPR). Offsets of order ten pixels with respect to the Magellan-defined cartographic grid may exist across the images and between observing years.