
 
 
  Instrument Overview
  ===================
    The Solar Wind Spectrometer (SWS), designed to measure protons and
    electrons at the lunar surface, was part of the Apollo 15 Lunar Surface
    Experiments Package (ALSEP) package left on the Moon.  It consisted of
    seven modulated Faraday cups opened toward different, but slightly
    overlapping, portions of the lunar sky.  The instrument was used to
    observe the directional intensities of the electron (6-1480 eV) and
    positive ion (30-10400 eV) components of the solar wind and magnetotail
    plasma that strike the surface of the Moon.  The scientific objectives
    of the SWS experiment were to measure electron charge fluxes at the
    lunar surface, study the interaction of the solar wind with the local
    magnetic field, determine if lunar limb shocks can be detected at dawn
    or dusk, measure solar wind conditions, make simultaneous comparisons
    with Apollo 12 data, and study time-dependent phenomena.
 
    Each Faraday cup had a circular opening, five circular grids, and a
    circular collector.  The five circular grids were an aperture grid, a
    modulator grid, a screen grid, a screen plate, and a suppressor grid.
    These served to apply an AC modulating field to incoming particles and
    screen the modulating field from the sensitive preamplifiers.  Sensor
    covers were over each cup to protect against dust during the
    extravehicular activities and the lunar module ascent.  Charged
    particles entered the cup and a current amplifier determined the
    resultant current flow.  Energy spectra of positively and negatively
    charged particles were obtained by applying fixed sequences of
    square-wave AC retarding potentials to a modular grid and measuring the
    resultant changes in current.  One cup (number 7) was oriented
    vertically and the other six cups (numbered 1-6 clockwise) surrounded
    it symmetrically facing 60 degrees off vertical.  The number 1 cup
    faced east on Apollo 15.  The electronics were in a
    temperature-controlled container below the sensor assembly attached to
    a radiator.  The instrument had deployed dimensions of 30.5 x 28.2 x
    34.5 cm, a mass of 5.7 kg, used 12.5 Watts total power, and had an
    average data rate of 66.2 bits/second.
 
    A sequence of plasma measurements was made every 28.1 seconds,
    consisting of 14 energy steps spaced a factor of square root of 2 apart
    for positive ions and 7 steps a factor of 2 apart for electrons.  Flux
    rates of 2.5E6 to 2.5E11 particles cm**-2 sec**-1 could be measured.  A
    large number of internal calibrations are provided.   The instrument as
    deployed had the east-west axis of the instrument 1 degree south of
    east and 2-degree slope to the east and a 2.5-degree splope to the
    north.  The north-south axis was self-leveling.   These were well
    within the 5-degree specifications for the instrument.  The ALSEP
    central station was located at 26.13407 degrees North latitude and
    3.62981 degrees East longitude on the lunar surface.  The solar wind
    spectrometer was situated 4 meters north of the central station and
    was emplaced so that cup number 1 faced east and the point between
    cups 5 and 6 faced north.
 
    The instrument was deployed on 31 July 1971 and turned on with the
    sensor covers in place to provide background data at 19:37:10 UT.  The
    covers were removed by command from Earth on 2 August 1971 at 18:07:32
    UT, approximately one hour after lunar module ascent. The experiment
    performed well until 5 November 1971, when intermittent modulation
    dripping in proton channels 13 and 14 occurred.  This intermittent,
    though scientifically usable, behavior continued until 30 June 1972,
    when the instrument experienced loss of science and engineering data.
    Analysis indicated that high-voltage arcing was occurring in the
    instrument electronics.  To prevent the additional power consumption
    this entailed, the instrument was put into standby mode indefinitely.
    Tests were done periodically but no change in status was detected, and
    the solar wind spectrometer was permanently commanded off on 14 June
    1974.
 
  This instrument description was provided by the NSSDC.

        