# Instrument Overview

During aerobraking, the accelerometers measure the change in velocity of
the spacecraft due to aerodynamic forces. The dominant force is along the
spacecraft y-direction. The spacecraft y-axis is approximately into the
wind. Data are provided at 1 second intervals and recorded in units of
m/s^2.


# Scientific Objectives

Accelerometer data were used to characterize the nature of the atmosphere,
to determine the effect of the atmosphere on each orbit, and to predict
the effect of the atmosphere on future orbits.


# Calibration

The instrument was calibrated on each orbit to determine drift in
instrument bias.  Bias is determined by monitoring the accelerometer
instrument during periods of inactivity before and after entering the
atmosphere. The bias acceleration is then estimated over the entire pass
by trending the data from the pre- and post-atmospheric entry periods.
The pre- and post-atmospheric periods were defined by instrument turn-on
and turn-off times and a lower limit on the altitude of data used for
calibration, typically 250 km.


# Operational Considerations

The instrument readings are affected by changes in temperature.  The
instrument is mounted in the inertial measurement unit (IMU) and the
temperature of the IMU is by temperature sensors.


# Operational Modes

The data from the accelerometer are passed to the telemetry deck during an
aerobraking pass from the time the s/c reaches aerobraking orientation
until the s/c returns to nominal orbit attitude.


# Measured Parameters

An accelerometer is an instrument that measures the acceleration of the
case of the sensor due to external forces.  All accelerometers have a
&apos;proof mass&apos; and it is the tendency of the proof mass to move relative to
the case that is a measure of the acceleration of the case.  Early
accelerometers produced output that was directly related to acceleration;
but modern sensors integrate the internally measured signal to reduce
noise and the output is proportional to the change in velocity over the
integration time.  In high precision accelerometers, like those on ODY,
the proof mass is an electronically floating mass.  The electromagnetic
field is varied to keep the proof mass stationary relative to the case.
The current required to accomplish this is proportional to the
acceleration. The accelerometers on ODY are sensitive to acceleration of
the center of mass (c.m.) of the s/c, pseudo-accelerations (i.e.
centrifugal) due to rigid motion of the s/c about the c.m., and
differences in gravitational force at the proof mass and the c.m. of the
s/c (gravity gradient).

