
 
  Instrument Overview
  ===================
    The ultraviolet photometer investigated the ultraviolet reflective
    properties or emission from interplanetary hydrogen, helium and
    dust, and from Jupiter's atmosphere and satellites. It was hoped to
    provide data to resolve the origin of interplanetary neutral
    hydrogen and establish the boundaries of the heliosphere. From
    measurements of the interplanetary helium, experimenters hoped to
    determine the percentage of this gas in the interstellar medium.
 
    The ultraviolet photometer had a fixed viewing angle and uses the
    spin of the spacecraft to scan around the celestial sphere. When
    close to Jupiter, the photometer scaned the medium above the cloud
    tops. By measuring the changes in the intensity of ultraviolet light
    reflected into two photocathodes of the instrument -- one measuring
    radiation at 1216 Angstroms, the other at 584 Angstroms -- the
    photometer detected light from hydrogen and helium respectively.
 
    Within the Jovian system the photometer measured the scattering of
    solar ultraviolet light by the atmosphere of Jupiter. This
    scattering provided information on the amount of atomic hydrogen in
    Jupiter's upper atmosphere, the mixing rate of Jupiter's atmosphere,
    the amount of helium there, and therefore the ratio of helium to
    hydrogen at Jupiter. Prior to Pioneer 10's mission helium had not
    been identified at the planet.
 
    By measuring changes in the ultraviolet light glow the instrument
    checked to see if Jupiter has polar auroras.
 
  ['Instrument Overview' was adapted from FIMMELETAL pp. 56-57.]

        