The Gran Telescopio CANARIAS (GTC), is currently the largest and one of the most
advanced optical and infra-red telescopes in the world. Its primary mirror consists
of 36 individual hexagonal segments that together act as a single mirror. The light
collecting mirror surface area of GTC is equivalent to that of a telescope with a
10.4m diameter single monolithic mirror. Thanks to its huge collecting area and
advanced engineering the GTC classes amongst the best performing telescopes for
astronomical research.

The GTC has also a secondary mirror and a tertiary mirror that together with the
primary mirror produce the telescope focal plane in the focal station of choice. The
scientific instruments that are placed in the focal station then analyse and detect
the light, and store the final data.

The telescope mount, a large mechanical, steel structure that holds the mirrors,
allows rotational movements of the telescope along a horizontal and vertical axis.
This movement has to be extremely precise in order to keep the stars projected stably
onto the detector. The telescope is designed so that it is able to observe the
optical and infrared light ranges.

GTC will be the last of the generation of so called 8 to 10 meter-class telescopes.
Therefore it has tried to improved the design of the predecessors, learning from
their experiences.

GTC is the largest telescope thanks to its huge light collecting surface of 75.7
square meters (73 m2 effective area). Apart from its large collecting surface another
key feature is the exquisite image quality that the telescope delivers and therefore
it can exploit the good sky quality to its maximum. The good image quality is made
possible thanks to the active adjustment of the optics. This active optics allows the
alignment, deformation and movement the individual segments that form the primary
mirror, as well as the alignment of the secondary mirror so as to always keep their
optimal position independently of the external conditions (climate, temperature,
gravity, manufacture faults, etc).